---
layout: page
title: Other models
---

In general, model systems are now being developed, in which the core is a 3D baroclinic, hydrodynamic model, but there are also ancillary models, which may be more or less closely coupled with the hydrodynamic model. There are many interaction processes in which contributions from other dynamic models may be affected (either 1-way or 2-way) by processes in other models. Examples include the atmospheric forcing terms for heat or momentum, in which parametrisations of fluxes may include effects of the surface of the ocean, such as SST or waves in the formulation.

## Wave modelling
There are various types of wave models, which may basically be divided into phase-resolving and phase-averaging models. In phase-resolving models (e.g. REF-DIF, FUNWAVE, refs) the individual waves on the sea surface are resolved, i.e. the surface is covered with a grid which is fine compared with the wave length (which may be from O(1) to O(100) metres). Phase-resolving models can be used only for regions of limited size because the computational grid has to be fine enough to resolve all relevant wavelengths. The actual limitation depends on the type of model used. There are time-dependent models and stationary models (in which the wave motion is purely periodic).
The most widely used time-dependent models are based on the Boussinesq equation, which is derived by integration over depth of the original 3-dimensional wave equation. The integration over depth limits the Boussinesq equation to be applicable in relatively shallow water, i.e. the depth must not be large compared with the wave length (although this requirement has been relaxed in recent work).
In phase-averaged models, only the statistics of the sea surface is computed, i.e. on points of a grid the action or energy spectra are computed. These types of models may be used from global to regional as well as local scales and are often called spectral wave models. Examples of the state-of-the-art, so-called 3rd-generation (3G), spectral wave models include WAM (such as ECWAM used at ECMWF) and WAVEWATCH III® (WW3, see https://polar.ncep.noaa.gov/waves/wavewatch/), now the standard model adopted by the UK Met Office) and Copernicus. 
The SWAN model (Booij et al., 1999) started a new era for the application of spectral wave modelling in the coastal zone. The SWAN model can be applied in stationary mode (no variation in time, assuming a steady state), in restricted coastal areas, but can also be run in non-stationary (time-stepping) mode.  SWAN is an open source code that can easily be implemented (http://www.swan.tudelft.nl/) and is the most widely-used spectral wave model code, by both the scientific and engineering community. SWAN is a 3G wave model using the same formulations for the source terms as WAM and WW3, plus some additional formulations primarily for shallow water. The numerical solution techniques are quite different - SWAN uses a semi-implicit method which allows longer time steps. SWAN can model many of the processes affecting wind-waves known today: wave generation by wind, wave propagation, current and depth refraction, frequency shifting due to currents and non-stationary water depth, wave dissipation by whitecapping, bottom friction, vegetation and depth-induced breaking, nonlinear interactions (both 4- and 3-wave interactions), wave induced setup, transmission and reflection by obstacles and diffraction. For many of the processes the user can choose between different formulations (e.g. the different combinations for wind input and white-capping/deep water dissipation terms). SWAN has been included in the FVCOM model suite, as SWAVE (Qi et al., 2009) but a new implementation of the coupling using the unstructured-grid SWAN model, unSWAN, has been carried out by Zheng et al. (2017), using the vortex force formalism, which has some improved features. The state of the art in coastal wave modelling is reviewed in Cavaleri et al. (2018).
Coupled FVCOM-SWAN (v.4.4.1) model start produce operational high-resolution waves parameters forecasts over the western coast of Scotland (WeStCOMS v2 domain) since December  2021 at SAMS, which is available via https://thredds.sams.ac.uk/ server.

## Sediment modelling
Sediment modelling is increasingly carried out as part of the requirement for ecosystem modelling in which fine sediment (suspended particulate matter, SPM) causes important changes in turbidity and hence light availability. Bottom sediment transport is important in the coastal zone in terms of coastal erosion and beach morphology, and how sediments affect the bottom roughness through grain size and bedforms. 

## Transport modelling including particle tracking
Often the main requirement for a model is to predict where some substance (whether conservative or non-conservative) is transported by the flow of water. This may include heat, salinity (or freshwater), nutrients, pollutants, biological organisms etc.  The transport may be modelled by an advection-dispersion module within the main hydrodynamic code or by a post-processing step, whereby the model currents are saved and used after the main hydrodynamic model run has been completed. Where the transported substance may be represented as particles (representing individual particles or groups of ‘real’ particles, with some characteristic), this may be referred to as a ‘particle-tracking’ model and may be run within the hydrodynamic code or offline, forced by previously saved hydrodynamic output. The latter has the advantage that movement of particles can be simulated independently of the (often more computationally expensive) hydrodynamics. Outputs from this type of model may be used to derive spread distributions of the focal substance, and in the case of “biological” particles, can be used to understand larval connectivity and its role in population dynamics. 

## Agent-based

## Biology and Biogeochemistry
Refer to ecosystem models e.g. ERSEM (European Regional Seas Ecosystem Model)

As part of EcoWatt2050 some work has been done on the interactions between physics from a baroclinic hydrodynamic model of NW shelf seas (NEMO-ERSEM  and FVCOM) and mobile marine species, including the joint distribution of predator-prey, at present and into the future. The parameters most effective in spatial correlation with distributions of species include bottom temperature, stratification and vertical velocity. Where ERSEM data on primary productivity are available, this is also a key parameter, but useful information can be derived from a physics model alone (Sadykova et al., 2017).

FVCOM-ERSEM code with FABM coupler was implemented in PML and recently applied at SAMS for the Scottish coastal waters test case study in Loch Ewe, nested into WeStCOMS domain under the NERC CAMPUS project at SAMS. This site was selected due to the availability of the longest plankton (phyto and zoo) observational dataset.

